UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775201 Date: 08/31/2015
RELEASE IN FULL
'
Diplomacy
Before and After Conflict
C
onflict is a universal condition,' older than diplomacy. While conflict is a constant in
human history, the nature of armed conflict, and especially the nature of 2P-century
warfare, has been transformed. General Rupert Smith identified these changes in his book
The Utility of Force: "The ends for which we fight are changing; we fight amongst the people; our
conflicts tend to be timeless; we fight so as not to lose the force; on each occasion new uses are found
for old weapons; the sides are mostly non-state."2
The nature of 21st-century diplomacy is also changing. To be successful, diplomats must simul-
taneously shape, act upon, and react to global challenges. As Hans Binnendijk and Richard Kugler
of the National Defense University argue, no single problem, danger, or threat holds the key to the
world's future. What matters is their interaction and the simultaneity of our responses.'
The definition of victory, too, is different today. Twenty-first-century national security suc-
cess will encompass a comprehensive definition of security, and will be achieved by the broadest
PRISM 1, NO. 4 F EATU RES I 3
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775201 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775201 Date: 08/31/2015
simultaneous application of all elements of
national power. This is the key to understanding
Philip Bobbitt's concept of "preclusive victory,"
which he describes as "anticipatory, precaution-
ary attention to possible futures," requiring an
expansive and integrated approach to modern
diplomacy, defense, and development. A diplo-
matic strategy designed to produce preclusive
victory will include conflict prevention, success-
ful negotiation, deterrence, the preparation for
conflict should all else fail, and efforts to estab-
lish order, ensure stability, and promote political
and economic pluralism after conflict.
Diplomats have always been participants in
both the prevention and management of con-
flict and its aftermath. The conflict prevention
side of diplomacy occupied much of my time
at the State Department from 1993 to 1997 as
the Department's Executive Secretary and U.S.
Ambassador to Turkey. Postconflict diplomacy
was a defining issue of the last third of my career at
State as Assistant Secretary of State for European
Affairs and as Under Secretary of State for Political
Affairs from 2001 to 2005. I have tried to draw
upon my experiences and observations to discuss
here the scope and complexity of modem diplo-
macy, the methods and goals needed to prevent
conflict, diplomacy's role when conflict is or seems
to be unavoidable, and the contribution diplomacy
can make to restoring stability following conflict.
Diplomacy and Conflict Prevention
Thanks to the efforts of scholars and practi-
tioners, we can now make better use of the meth-
ods and theory of conflict prevention. The United
States Institute of Peace and the Woodrow Wilson
International Center for Scholars are two among
many institutions that have taken a leadership
role in these efforts. Michael Lund, a practitioner-
scholar, notes that the present uncoordinated and
patchy nature of preventive diplomacy reflects
the absence of any accepted international conflict
prevention regime or system of governance—that
is, of agreed upon arrangements through which
geographic jurisdictions are allocated, functional
responsibilities are assigned, norms and procedures
are formulated, and actors are held accountable for
their responsibilities.5 He asks the crucial ques-
tion to all those who seek to "coordinate and
rationalize" a system of preventive diplomacy:
where should responsibility for the tasks of pre-
ventive action be located—early warning, the
decision to act, the formulation of a response, or
the provision of bureaucratic and political support?
Should it be horizontal, across different organiza-
tions or actors, or should it be vertical, up or down
their chains of command?'
An example of conflict prevention that
meets Lund's tests was the effort undertaken
by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), in close collaboration with the
European Union (EU) and the Organisation
for Security and Co-operation in Europe, and
supported by the United States, to avoid civil
war in Macedonia in 2001. It is difficult now to
recall that, until September 11, 2001, the pos-
sibility of civil war in Macedonia was a leading
international headline. This successful cam-
paign of conflict prevention was defined by the
remarkable personal and institutional coopera-
tion between the NATO Secretary General Lord
Robertson and the EU High Representative for
the Common Foreign and Security Policy (and
a former NATO Secretary General) Javier
Solana. I spoke often during this period to Lord
Robertson, Solana, and Ambassador James
Pardew, whom President George W. Bush and
Secretary Colin Powell appointed as the U.S.
representative to the effort and who, along with
Francois Leotard, the EU Special Envoy, played
a crucial role in negotiating and implementing
the Ohrid Framework Agreement.
4 I FEATURES PRISM 1, NO. 4
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775201 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775201 Date: 08/31/2015
As a direct participant, senior NATO official
Mark Laity stated that there are insights about
modem diplomacy and conflict prevention to be
drawn from this effort, including the need for per-
sonal and institutional teamwork, the importance
of early engagement in trying to head off violence,
the need to choose the right people for tasks of
this kind (including 21-century diplomats who
can act "unconventionally"), and the necessity
of being able to apply appropriate force quickly.'
Diplomacy When Conflict Is or Seems
to Be Unavoidable
When diplomacy fails to prevent conflict,
the role of the diplomat changes. The new
requirement may be to justify the use of force
when all efforts to avoid conflict fail or to seek
to address the underlying source of conflict when
force is or seems to be inevitable and imperative.
The February 1999 diplomatic negotiations
in Rambouillet, France, were designed to show
the world that NATO and the Contact Group
were willing to make one last effort to avoid
using military force to stop Slobodan Milosevic's
attacks in Kossovo. I was in Rambouillet as
Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs
to support Secretary Madeleine Albright. After
the first day or so of the meeting, there was so
much chaos that I urged Secretary Albright to
depart Rambouillet and leave the "negotiating"
to those of us more junior. My strategy was that
by not being present, the Secretary of State—
and the administration—could keep a distance
from an outcome that might be unacceptable to
the United States. The Secretary had a differ-
ent vision. Albright hoped Rambouillet would
end the brutality against the Kosovars, but she
was also prepared for the meeting to fail, and
thereby all options for avoiding military con-
flict would be exhausted. Her idea was that we
had to be seen to be doing everything we could
diplomatically, including her continued pres-
ence, so that if Rambouillet was a failure, there
could be no further excuses against taking mili-
tary action.
Secretary of State James Baker had pursued
a similar strategy before the first Gulf War in
1991. Baker relates in his memoirs, The Politics of
Diplomacy, that President George H.W. Bush had
concluded the United States should offer a meet-
ing in Washington for Iraqi Foreign Minister Tariq
Aziz followed by a Baker trip to Baghdad to show
America's commitment to avoiding war if pos-
sible. Baker writes that he thought this proposal
had three merits: it would give the administra-
tion one last diplomatic opening to avoid war; it
would shore up domestic support for conflict; and
it would show that, as the deadline for Iraq's with-
drawal from Kuwait neared, the administration
was doing something other than just preparing for
war. The President's offer turned into the famous
meeting between Baker and Aziz on January 9,
1991. As Baker recounts, "I was under no illusions.
I assumed the talks would be unsuccessful and that
within a matter of days, we would be at war."'
In 2001-2003, the State Department lead-
ership generally saw Iraq as a diversion from
Afghanistan and not central to the war on ter-
ror. Saddam Hussein was a dictator and a men-
ace—but "in a box," posing no immediate, direct
threat to the United States; focus should be
kept on defeating al Qaeda in Afghanistan and
supporting the new Afghan government.' Iraq
had been a source of tension and disagreement
inside the State Department since the begin-
ning of the administration, and there were some
who sought to move the policy from support for
PRISM 1, NO. 4 FEATURES 5
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775201 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775201 Date: 08/31/2015
"smart" United Nations (UN) sanctions toward
an aggressive posture against Saddam.
Secretary of State Henry Kissinger wrote in
Years of Upheaval about the second term of the
Nixon administration that State Department
culture emphasizes negotiability, which is a con-
sciousness of what the other side will accept.°
Kissinger did not consider this trait a particular
positive at the time, and the department's culture
of negotiability did not serve as a good guide to
institutional behavior for most of the senior State
officials who participated in the interagency
debate leading to the invasion of Iraq. If that was
so during the period surrounding 1970s détente
with Russia, diplomatic efforts with the Shah of
Iran, and the crisis in the Middle East and the
resulting 1973 war, this culture of negotiability
no longer served as a good guide to institutional
behavior for most of the senior State officials who
participated in the interagency debate leading to
the invasion of Iraq. We took part in planning
for the conflict and its aftermath assuming—or
hoping—that events either at home or abroad
would turn preparations for conflict into success-
ful coercive diplomacy rather than the military
action that was ordered in the spring of 2003.
The State Department's Director of Policy
Planning, Richard Haass, observed that while he
was "60:40 against going to war.
... no organiza-
tion could function if people left every time they
lost out on a 60:40 decision." Haass was operat-
ing under the belief that Iraq had weapons of mass
destruction; if he had known they did not, he says
he would have been 90:10 against the war.
And no senior Department of State offi-
cer resigned in protest. The department sought
instead to try to recreate the successful Gulf
War coalition of President George H.W. Bush
and argued that the United States and its allies
might compel Saddam to submit through a
deployment of force in the region in early
2003. If this failed, there should be a sustained
diplomatic effort to create a broad coalition to
move militarily later in 2003. This possibility of
a broad international coalition lost all relevance
on January 20, 2003, when the French govern-
ment announced that it would never support
a second UN Security Council resolution to
authorize the use of force in Iraq.
Diplomacy in Preparation for Conflict
Once conflict is inevitable or is initiated,
one job of diplomats is to support military com-
manders in getting what they need to make
conflict as short as possible, with the fewest
casualties for Americans, allies, and civilians.
This was the objective that the United States
pursued in Turkey before the first Gulf War,
which resulted in President Turgut Ozal's sup-
port of American efforts. The diplomatic effort
to prepare for conflict in Kosovo also involved
the whole of the U.S. Government and the
governments of the NATO Allies. To pursue
a successful bombing campaign, diplomats in
many NATO countries arranged for overflight
and support for Allied forces. A similar effort by
U.S. diplomats took place before the invasion of
Afghanistan in 2001. American and allied dip-
lomats worked closely with nations surrounding
Afghanistan, including forging contacts with
Central Asian states on security issues for the
first time in order to achieve transit, overflight,
and bed-down rights for American and coali-
tion forces before the October 7, 2001, begin-
ning of action in Afghanistan.
6 I FEATURES PRISM 1, NO. 4
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775201 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775201 Date: 08/31/2015
Before the invasion of Iraq in March 2003,
and especially after January 20, 2003, a similar
effort began in earnest. Diplomats supported U.S.
Central Command commander General Tommy
Franks in order to make the war as short and suc-
cessful as possible and to limit American, allied,
and Iraqi civilian casualties. American diplomats
worked with military commanders to seek access
to facilities for U.S. forces and to participate in
the public diplomacy effort to gain as much sup-
port as possible for the armed liberation of Iraq.
American diplomats and Pentagon officials again
paid particular attention to Turkey in an effort
to convince the Turks to allow the 46 Infantry
Division to transit that country to create a north-
ern front in the battle against Saddam's forces.
Although the State Department worried about
the size of the Department of Defense (DOD)
request to Ankara, it worked closely with both
civilian and military authorities at the Pentagon
to try to meet the need that had been identi-
fied by the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Joint DOD—State diplomacy, however, could not
overcome a negative vote in the Turkish parlia-
ment, which reflected strong public opposition
to the war.
The way the debate about using force is
carried out inside the government influences
attitudes and actions during and after conflict
as well as future decisions on whether or not to
use force. Military force may restore security, but
it cannot resolve political or cultural sources of
conflict. As Rupert Smith writes, "We are engag-
ing in conflict for objectives that do not lead to a
resolution of the matter directly by force of arms,
since at all but the most basic tactical level our
objectives tend to concern the intentions of the
people and their leaders rather than their territory
or forces."2 Smith argues that the civil-military
structure designed to make political-military
decisions is "deeply problematic" and distorts
decisionmaking in many ways." In his book,
Smith imagines a debate between British Foreign
and Commonwealth Office (FCO) and Ministry
of Defense (MOD) officials about how to address
the genocide taking place over a number of weeks
in Rwanda during the summer of 1994.
FCO: What can we do in the face of events
in Rwanda?
MOD: What do you want us to do?
FCO: We ought to act. Something must
be done. We can't have people being
massacred. As a permanent member
of the UN Security Council we can-
not be seen to be doing nothing.
MOD: So you want us to use military force?
FCO: Yes.
MOD: To do what? To stop the killing?
FCO: Yes. Exactly.
MOD: Who do you want us to fight? We
are not clear who is doing the kill-
ing: is it tribe on tribe, or is it a force
found from a tribe? And Rwanda is
a big country. Where do we start?
Kigali, presumably, it's the capital
and we would want an airheacl.
PRISM 1, NO. 4 FEATURES I 7
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775201 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775201 Date: 08/31/2015
FCO: Well, there must be an international force, of course.
MOD: And what would be the British aim in joining the force?
FCO: To play our part as a permanent member of the UN Security Council.
MOD: Is Britain to lead the force?
FCO: No, it should be led by the UN—a proper UN mission.
MOD: That will take some time to assemble, so it will probably be too late to stop the killing.
FCO: Then the mission should be aimed at bringing postconflict order.
MOD: OK. But we need to be clear how many British troops are currently available. Given our
deployments in Ireland, Bosnia and a few other places, not many.
FCO: What do you suggest?
MOD: What are our government's priorities? Is contributing to this force a higher priority than
these other tasks we are already undertaking?
FCO: Probably not.
MOD: In that case, these UN forces always lack expeditionary logistic support. And if we want
to speed up the deployment of this force, offering a logistic unit would probably be the
most valuable contribution.
FCO: Will that put our soldiers at risk?
MOD: Hardly any.'4
Many American diplomats will recognize this imaginary conversation, having participated
in something like it dozens of times since the fall of the Berlin Wall. In the American debate, the
issue also quickly focuses on who pays the bills. It is worth stating, at least in the American case,
that officials at the Pentagon and DOD often were legitimately frustrated by the State Department's
inclination to promote military missions for the Pentagon and the Armed Forces in an increasing
number of situations that were important, but not vital, to U.S. national interests. While this readi-
ness to volunteer U.S. military forces to solve problems around the world was a direct result of the
lack of civilian capacity to do the jobs required, it leads to understandable consternation among
those in uniform.
81 FEATURES PRISM 1. NO. 4
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775201 Date: 08/31/2015
U.S. medics care for farmer injur
.Vd by enemy forces
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775201 Date: 08/31/2015
Diplomacy and Restoring Stability Following Conflict
There are many issues—defeating extremism, promoting pluralism, bringing the benefits of
globalization to those who have not yet benefited, living sustainably on the planet, nonprolifera-
tion—that will be part of any definition of successful 21-century diplomacy. But getting postconflict
diplomacy right--creating the conditions for a preclusive victory—may be the most crucial of all.
This is not an easy assignment. The concept of success can be redefined after the fact, further com-
plicating the assessment. Successful democratic governance and economic development cannot be
delivered on a certain date, and therefore the need for time and patience is a necessity on the ground.
However, patience is limited in home countries, and "fatigue" often sets in. Thus, the potential for
failure is high. Industrial war produced winners and losers; today's lines are not so clearly drawn,
and the timeline may be longer.
Rupert Smith again brings clarity to this assessment:
We intervene in or even decide to escalate to, a conflict in order to establish a condition in which the
political objective can be achieved by other means and in other ways. We seek to create a conceptual
space for diplomacy, economic incentives, political pressure and other measures to create a desired politi-
cal outcome of stability, and if possible democracy. . . . if a decisive strategic victory was the hallmark
of interstate industrial war, establishing a condition may be deemed a hallmark of the new paradigm of
war amongst the people .15
PRISM 1, NO. 4 F EATU RES I 9
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775201 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775201 Date: 08/31/2015
Smith's point can be pressed even further by
recognizing the additional distinction between a
military operation carried out following Smith's
rules and the ambiguity inherent in trying to
create the conditions Smith identifies as objec-
tives. Christopher Schnaubelt has noted that a
typical military operation will have unambiguous
geographic boundaries (areas of responsibility)
and will assign specific units to be responsible for
every inch of ground or cubic foot of airspace.
There is an obvious chain of responsibilities and
expected actions between each individual Soldier
or Marine on the ground and the commanding
general. Nothing comparable exists for economic
development in governance tasks, which tend to
be assigned by function rather than local geogra-
phy or rigid hierarchy of authority.'6
Postconflict diplomacy was among the
defining diplomatic issues of the last third of
my career at the State Department.
In the aftermath of the first Gulf War in
1991, almost 500,000 Kurds fled to the moun-
tains between Iraq and Turkey. Stranded in
harsh conditions, they began to starve by the
thousands each day. I was then the Deputy Chief
of Mission in Turkey. Inspired by the leadership
of Ambassador Morton Abramowitz, American
diplomats, followed by American military forces
and then an international coalition of govern-
ments and nongovernmental organizations, initi-
ated Operation Provide Comfort (which became
Operation Northern Watch). This was not just
a "whole-of-government" but a "whole-of-the-
international-community" campaign to provide
humanitarian assistance and then return the
Kurds to their homes in Northern Iraq. Once
home, they needed to be protected, and for 11
years, the United Sates and some of its allies,
including Turkey, worked on the ground there to
recreate a functioning society and then protected
this area from Saddam by enforcing a no-fly zone.
These years were also punctuated by activity
in the Balkans. As Richard Holbrooke recounts,
some of the pre-Dayton negotiations with Bosnian
leader Alija Izetbegovi took place in my residence
while I was Ambassador to Turkey." As one of
Holbrooke's successors as Assistant Secretary for
European Affairs, I watched the effort made by
Ambassadors Robert Gelbard and James Dobbins
to implement the Dayton Accords by applying
whole-of-government efforts in postconflict post-
Yugoslavia. I picked up the diplomatic thread
again as Under Secretary of State for Political
Affairs promoting reconciliation, development,
political progress, and nationbuilding in Kosovo.
Other postconflict diplomacy efforts in
Haiti, East Timor, and Liberia called upon the
resources of the United States and other gov-
ernments to try to create the conceptual space
for development and sustained peace. The U.S.
effort in Colombia, too, highlighted the need
to focus on an integrated and cross-sectoral.
approach, which included disarmament, demo-
bilization, and reintegration of former combat-
ants and promoted justice in postconflict soci-
ety. But the main events in modern diplomacy's
postconflict paradigm are Afghanistan and Iraq.
The key to understanding U.S. diplomacy
in postconflict Afghanistan and Iraq is to recall
the profound disagreement inside the U.S.
Government, especially between DOD and
State, about whether the United States should
engage in "nationbuilding," a policy President
Bush had campaigned against in 2000. State
Department professionals were generally proud
10 I FEATURES PRISM 1, NO. 4
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775201 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775201 Date: 08/31/2015
of the effort the United States had made in
nationbuilding and in peacekeeping, support-
ing the deployment of U.S. military forces to
participate, for example, in the Multinational
Force and Observers in the Sinai and in peace-
keeping and nationbuilding activities in East
Timor, Haiti, and the Balkans. Most believed
that nationbuilding, properly funded and exe-
cuted, was an effective long-term tool of inte-
grated modem diplomacy for the United States.
The effort to create a new Afghan govern-
ment after the overthrow of the Taliban was a
piece of classical diplomacy carried out in the
21-century context.'8 Secretary Powell directed
Ambassador Dobbins to support the regional nego-
tiation hosted by the Germans in Bonn in 2001
to create a new Afghan government. To succeed,
Dobbins worked with all the key players, includ-
ing representatives from Iran, to support a major
role for the United Nations and put Hamid Karzai
in position to lead a new Afghanistan.'9 But, as
Dobbins has written, the "Bush Administration,
having overthrown the Taliban and installed a new
government in Kabul, determined that American
troops would do no peacekeeping and that peace-
keepers from other countries would not be allowed
to venture beyond the Kabul city limits. Public
security throughout the rest of the country would
be left entirely to Afghans, despite the fact that
Afghanistan had no army and no police force.”"
The struggle over nationbuilding also
hampered American attempts to get sufficient
amounts of U.S. or international assistance to
Afghanistan. Washington accepted the diffusion
of responsibility there, with the British taking
charge of countemarcotics, the Italians reform-
ing the justice sector, and the Germans training
police. This satisfied the need for burden-sharing
but did not lead to success. In addition, postcon-
flict resources focused by the United States on
Afghanistan were small compared to other recent
postconflict situations, even including Kosovo."
American diplomats who followed Dobbins to the
Embassy in Kabul over the years faced the legacy
of this lack of attention and underinvestment.22.
The State Department participated at many
levels in the National Security Council—led plan-
ning for postconflict Iraq. Much of the planning
was detailed, but focused on lessons learned from
the first Gulf War. The department's Future of
Iraq Project, while important, would not have
solved Iraq's postwar problems. State did not
have the capacity to take responsibility for
the immediate postconflict administration of
Iraq, and its leadership agreed to the Executive
order creating a postconflict Iraq structure that
reported to the Secretary of Defense.
There is no need here to recount the lost lives
and lost opportunities so well chronicled by oth-
ers in the immediate postconflict period in Iraq,
although Dobbins's argument that, looking back,
the Coalition Provisional Authority accomplished
a great deal under trying circumstances is worth
noting." On July 1, 2004, the State Department
did officially open (on time and on budget) an
Embassy in Baghdad, which allowed an expan-
sion of diplomacy and led to more comprehensive
senior civilian-military cooperation.
There is another important lesson to draw
from recent postconflict efforts: the need to have
adequate civilian capacity to respond, includ-
ing a role for a revitalized U.S. Agency for
International Development (USAID). As this
journal chronicled in an article" by Ambassador
John Herbst, the Secretary of State's Coordinator
for Reconstruction and Stabilization (S/CRS),
his office was mandated to develop a whole-of-
government civilian response to stability opera-
tions and to ensure civilian-military coordination.
The Civilian Response Corps (CRC) is in
an early stage, and ultimately will be made up of
a reserve component, in addition to the existing
PRISM 1, NO. 4 FEATURES I 11
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775201 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775201 Date: 08/31/2015
active and standby components. The personnel
are anticipated to represent the full range of sec-
tor experts: engineers, lawyers, judges, corrections
officials, diplomats, development experts, public
administrators, public health officials, city planners,
border control officials, economists, and others.
Currently, the active and standby components that
are being stepped up are drawn from State, USAID,
and a core group of domestic U.S. agencies.
Once congressionally funded, the reserves
would be drawn from state and local govern-
ments and the private sector. Between January
2008 and May 2009, 56 CRC members deployed
to 11 countries, including Afghanistan for plan-
ning purposes, and there are realistic plans to
have 250 active members and 1,000 standby
members ready to deploy by the end of 2010.
There are now at least 14 other countries with
whom the United States allies that have a civil-
ian peacebuilding capacity—some including sta-
bility or civilian police, and employing whole-
of-government or "comprehensive" approaches
similar to that created by Washington. Several,
in fact, have higher budgets proportionate to
their gross national products than America's."
One way for State to further support the
S/CRS effort would be to consider creating a
new personnel specialty: the "expeditionary
diplomat." Washington's diplomatic personnel
have, of course, always been in one sense expe-
ditionary; the majority of the Foreign Service is
deployed abroad the majority of the time. But
the post-9/11 diplomatic experience, and espe-
cially the effort in Iraq and Afghanistan, means
that State needs to be more explicit about the
expeditionary nature of some of its future dip-
lomatic work and should prepare a small but
significant number of people to serve success-
fully in the hardest places at a moment's notice.
. Experience with the Provincial Reconstruction
Teams in Iraq and Afghanistan, the lessons learned
with S/CRS, and the example of diplomats who
have pursued careers in the toughest posts should
lead State leadership to conclude that this is a
step worth taking. The first requirement would be
advanced training, some of it provided by DOD
and some by the Central Intelligence Agency, for
those entering diplomats who believe they want
to pursue this special career path. These entering
officers would make an explicit choice and under-
stand that an investment in their extra training
would require their service in hard places, just as
we now ask diplomats who take the hardest lan-
guages—Chinese or Arabic, for example—to serve
more than one tour using their skills. Since these
expeditionary diplomats will not need to meet
the same age and physical requirements as special
operations in the military, the State Department
could allow people to opt in and out of this "special
force" during their careers as long as they have the
proper training. This would allow flexibility across
the institution and encourage those who desire or
whose family circumstances might change over
time to participate as well. The department would
also need to make sure those taking this career path
are recognized for a career beyond the norm for
Foreign Service and are promoted and rewarded.
The creation of S/CRS is a symbol of the
comprehensive, simultaneous diplomacy needed
for the future, and this expeditionary diplo-
mat could form the backbone of the State and
USAID commitment to the civilian response
capacity. There are still key questions to be
answered about civilian capacity. In the face of
a real world situation, will DOD really support a
State Department–led operation? Will Congress
adequately fund S/CRS, including a reasonable
contingency fund? How will S/CRS and a resur-
gent USAID work together? Where will the lines
be drawn between immediate postconflict needs
and nationbuilding? There seems to be no ques-
tion that the path is the right one, consistent
12 FEATURES PRISM 1, NO. 4
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775201 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775201 Date: 08/31/2015
with the administration's focus on diplomacy,
development, and defense. Success will come
with clear direction and active implementation.
If we combine the observations made by
several authors," we arrive at this question:
What national policies, supported by adequate
human and financial resources, will create the
conditions during and after war to bring about a
preclusive victory? Nationbuilding, postconflict
reconstruction and stability operations, and coun-
terinsurgency strategy (call it what we will) will
be part of modern diplomacy for years to come.
Accomplishing this task does not have to be an
exclusively American responsibility, and, indeed,
one of the goals of modern American diplomats
will be to make these efforts more international.
But for the foreseeable future, the United States
will need to learn the lessons of its role in nation-
building from Germany to Iraq." These lessons
include support for new institutions that bring all
of the elements of power and influence together
in the same theater, at the same time, and in close
coordination so the United States and its allies
and friends have a chance to succeed." As Philip
Bobbitt has written, "The problem is the picture of
warfare to which we cling. This picture unfolds in
this way: peace making by diplomats; war making
by the Armed Forces; peace building by EUSIA1D
and reconstruction personnel. The reality of 21"
century warfare, however, is that all of these tasks
must be performed simultaneously."29
While the challenges and opportunities of
the 2lst century can be observed and analyzed
individually, none of them can be solved with-
out reference to the others. Diplomacy is not
the answer to every question, but it has util-
ity both before and after conflict. As General
Smith writes at the end of his volume:
For the general purpose of all interventions is
clear: we seek to establish in the minds of the
people and their leaders that the ever present
option of conflict is not the preferable course of
action when in confrontation over some matter
or another. This applies as much to the state
possessing nuclear weapons or seeking to obtain
them, rogue or otherwise, as it does to the terror-
ist or the machete-wielding rebel; each is posing
an armed threat to people to establish a con-
dition in which to achieve its political goal. To
do this, military force is a valid option, a lever
of intervention and influence, as much as eco-
nomic, political and diplomatic levers, but to be
effective it must be applied as a part of a greater
scheme focusing all measures on the one goal."
The connection to the utility of a mod-
ern diplomacy is clear. Twenty-first-century
diplomacy, working to prevent conflict, trying
to get ready for it if it is inevitable, or dealing
with the consequences, can be an effective tool
of national security if it is adequately funded;
carried out by well-trained, dedicated people,
focused on clear goals set by national leaders,
and backed by effective military force. This is
the diplomacy of the future. PRISM
The author expresses appreciation to The'
Cohen Group for allowing him time to con-
sider these issues and to the Woodrow Wilson
International Center for Scholars and the
Harvard John F. Kennedy School Project
on Diplomacy for supporting the effort.
The author also gratefully acknowledges the
important contributions of Toni Getze, Jill
O'Donnell, and Daniel Bliss in making this
article a reality.
PRISM I, NO. 4 FEATURES 13
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775201 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775201 Date: 08/31/2015
Notes
I. William Zartman, Preventive Negotiation: Avoiding Conflict Escalation (Lanham, MD: Rowman &
Littlefield, 2001), 3.
'Rupert Smith, The Utility of Force: The Art of War in the Modern World (New York: Vintage Books, 2008), 19.
3 Hans Binnendijk and Richard L. Kugler, Seeing the Elephant: The U.S. Role in Global Security (Washington,
DC: National Defense University Press and Potomac Books, 2006), 286.
4 Philip Bobbitt, Terror and Consent: The Wars for the Twenty-first Century (New York: Alfred A. Knopf,
2008), 207.
5 Michael S. Lund, Preventing Violent Conflicts: A Strategy for Preventive Diplomacy (Washington, DC:
United States Institute of Peace, 1996), 171.
Ibid., 172.
7 Mark Laity, Preventing War in Macedonia, Whitehall Paper Number 68 (London: Royal United Services
Institute, January 2008).
James A. Baker III, The Politics of Diplomacy (New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons, 1995), 345-365.
9 Richard Haass, War of Necessity, War of Choice: A Memoir of Two Iraq Wars (New York: Simon and
Schuster, 2009), 211-212.
10 Henry A. Kissinger, Years of Upheaval (Boston: Little, Brown, 1982), 445.
" Haass, 247.
IS Smith, 308.
"
" Ibid., 313-314.
" Ibid., 272-273.
16 Christopher M. Schnaubelt, "Complex Operations and Interagency Operational Art," PRISM 1, no. 1
(December 2009), 41.
17 Richard Holbrooke, To End a War (New York: Random House, 1999), 127-131.
18 Bobbitt and Smith.
19 James F. Dobbins, After the Taliban: Nation-building in Afghanistan (Washington, DC: Potomac Books, 2008).
" James F. Dobbins, "Organizing for Victory," PRISM 1, no. 1 (December 2009), 54.
" James F. Dobbins et al., America's Role in Nation Building: From Germany to Iraq (Santa Monica, CA:
RAND, 2003).
" Ronald E. Neumann, The Other War: Winning and Losing in Afghanistan (Washington, DC: Potomac
Books, 2009).
23 Dobbins, "Organizing," 61.
24 John E. Herbst, "Addressing the Problem of Failed States: A New Instrument," PRISM 1, no. 1
(December 2009), 21-26.
25 Ibid.
26 See Bobbitt, Smith, and Dobbins.
27 Dobbins et al.
28 Robert Hunter et al., Integrating Instruments of Power and Influence (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2008), 11.
" Bobbitt, 155.
3° Smith, 409.
14 I FEATURES PRISM 1, NO. 4
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775201 Date: 08/31/2015
